# Machine Learning Based Intrusion Detection Systemfor Software Defined Networking

This is My Thesis for MS Inforamtion Security from Air University, E-9, Islamabad.

Software-defined networks (SDNs) have revolutionized network management by introducing a centralized and programmable approach to network control. The centralized control of the network is governed by the SDN controller, making it a vital component of this architecture. However, current attack detection schemes for SDNs face several challenges, including high false positive rates, low detection performance with increased error rates, and high computational costs. An intrusion detection system (IDS) for SDNs that uses machine learning techniques with a novel feature selection process is being developed to address these issues. The research involves several steps, starting with dataset selection, feature selection, model evaluation, and performance metrics analysis. The InSDN dataset is chosen as the benchmark dataset from five different datasets for dataset selection. Feature selection involves using techniques such as Forward Selection, Backward Selection, Bi-Directional Elimination, and Variance Threshold to identify the most relevant features and enhance dataset quality. Various machine learning classifiers are used in the research, such as KNN, Gaussian-NB, Bernoulli-NB, Decision Tree using gini index & entropy, Random Forest (RF), AdaBoost, Gradient Boost (GB), CNN, LSTM, and CNN-LSTM. The evaluation of classifiers in this study includes multiple performance metrics, which comprise accuracy, precision, recall, F-1 score, false positive rate (FPR), true negative rate (TNR), and error rate. The evaluation is performed on eight distinct classes: BFA, Botnet, DDoS, DoS, Normal, Probe, U2R, and Web-attack. The results show that the Decision Tree using gini index and Entropy variants, Random Forest, and K-Nearest Neighbor classifiers perform the best, with an accuracy of more than 99.88% for all classes and an error rate of below 0.26% for all classes. These results outperform previous studies and demonstrate the potential of machine learningbased IDS for SDNs. The research contributes to developing more effective and efficient network security solutions, providing valuable insights into improving network security by detecting and preventing cyber-attacks, thus enhancing the overall security of SDNs.
